Protocol changes for supporting V2 Checkpoints (#1946)
delta-io/delta: PROTOCOL.md

  - [Consistency Between Table Metadata and Data Files](#consistency-between-table-metadata-and-data-files)
  - [Delta Log Entries](#delta-log-entries-1)
  - [Checkpoints](#checkpoints-1)
    - [Checkpoint Specs](#checkpoint-specs)

>       - [V2 Spec](#v2-spec)

Reviewer: When would Spark support V2 checkpoint?

An action changes one aspect of the table's state, for example, adding or removing a file.

### Checkpoints
Checkpoints are also stored in the `_delta_log` directory, and can be created at any time, for any committed version of the table.
For performance reasons, readers should prefer to use the newest complete checkpoint possible.
For time travel, the checkpoint used must not be newer than the time travel version.

A checkpoint contains the complete replay of all actions, up to and including the checkpointed table version, with invalid actions removed.

> Invalid actions are those that have been canceled out by a subsequent ones (for example removing a file that has been added), using the [rules for reconciliation](#Action-Reconciliation).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Invalid actions are those that have been canceled out by subsequent ones (for example removing a file that has been added), using the [rules for reconciliation](#Action-Reconciliation).
```

In addition to above, checkpoint also contains the [_remove tombstones_](#add-file-and-remove-file) until they are expired.
Checkpoints allow readers to short-cut the cost of reading the log up-to a given point in order to reconstruct a snapshot, and they also allow [Metadata cleanup](#metadata-cleanup) to delete expired JSON Delta log entries.

Readers SHOULD NOT make any assumptions about the existence or frequency of checkpoints, with one exception:
[Metadata cleanup](#metadata-cleanup) MUST provide a checkpoint for the oldest kept table version, to cover all deleted [Delta log entries](#delta-log-entries).
That said, writers are encouraged to checkpoint reasonably frequently, so that readers do not pay excessive log replay costs due to reading large numbers of delta files.

The checkpoint file name is based on the version of the table that the checkpoint contains.

Delta supports three kinds of checkpoints:

> 1. UUID-named Checkpoints: These follow [V2 spec](#v2-spec) which uses the following file name: `n.checkpoint.u.{json/parquet}`, where `u` is a UUID and `n` is the

Author: All of them are valid. A reader is free to choose any of them.

snapshot version that this checkpoint represents. The UUID-named V2 Checkpoint may be in json or parquet format, and references zero or more checkpoint sidecars

> in the `_delta_log/_sidecars` directory. A checkpoint sidecar is a uniquely-named parquet file: {unique}.parquet" where unique is some unique

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the `_delta_log/_sidecars` directory. A checkpoint sidecar is a uniquely-named parquet file: `{unique}.parquet` where `unique` is some unique
```

Author: We are not putting restriction on length as of now - today we don't put constrain name on data file names which are arbitrary parquet files. Following same model here.

string such as a UUID.

For example:

```
00000000000000000010.checkpoint.80a083e8-7026-4e79-81be-64bd76c43a11.json
_sidecars/3a0d65cd-4056-49b8-937b-95f9e3ee90e5.parquet
_sidecars/016ae953-37a9-438e-8683-9a9a4a79a395.parquet
_sidecars/7d17ac10-5cc3-401b-bd1a-9c82dd2ea032.parquet
```

2. A [classic checkpoint](#classic-checkpoint) for version `n` of the table consists of a file named `n.checkpoint.parquet`.
These could follow either [V1 spec](#v1-spec) or [V2 spec](#v2-spec).
For example:

```
00000000000000000010.checkpoint.parquet
```

3. A [multi-part checkpoint](#multi-part-checkpoint) for version `n` consists of `p` "part" files (`p > 1`), where

> part `o` of `p` is named `n.checkpoint.o.p.parquet`. These could only be [V1 checkpoints](#v1-spec).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
part `o` of `p` is named `n.checkpoint.o.p.parquet`. These are always [V1 checkpoints](#v1-spec).
```

sizeInBytes | The number of bytes of the checkpoint. This field is optional.
numOfAddFiles | The number of AddFile actions in the checkpoint. This field is optional.
checkpointSchema | The schema of the checkpoint file. This field is optional.

> tags | Map containing any additional metadata about the last checkpoint. This field is optional.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
tags | String-string map containing any additional metadata about the last checkpoint. This field is optional.
```

}
```

> ### Sidecar File Information

Reviewer 2: We should probably update the Action Reconciliation section to specifically state that v2 checkpoint actions are not allowed in normal commit files, and do not participate in log replay?

> The sidecar file action references a [SidecarFile](#sidecar-files) which provides some of the checkpoint's file actions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `sidecarFile` action references a [sidecar file](#sidecar-files) which provides some of the checkpoint's file actions.
```
?

The serialization method is described in Sections [Partition Value Serialization](#partition-value-serialization) and [Schema Serialization Format](#schema-serialization-format).

Enablement:
- To have a column of TimestampNTZ type in a table, the table must have Reader Version 3 and Writer Version 7. A feature name `timestampNTZ` must exist in the table's `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.

# V2 Checkpoint Table Feature
Enablement:
- To enable [V2 Checkpoints](#v2-spec) on a table, the table must have Reader Version 3 and Writer Version 7. A feature name `v2Checkpoint` must exist in the table's `readerFeatures` and `writerFeatures`.

When enabled:
- A table could use [uuid-named](#uuid-named-checkpoint) [V2 spec Checkpoints](#v2-spec) which must have [checkpoint metadata](#checkpoint-metadata) and may have [sidecar files](#sidecar-files) OR

> - A table could use [classic](#classic-checkpoint) checkpoints which can be follow [V1](#v1-spec) or [V2](#v2-spec) spec.

Reviewer 2: Also: An enabled table must not use multi-part checkpoints?

Refer to the [appendix](#checkpoint-schema) for an example on the schema of the checkpoint.

Delta supports two checkpoint specs and three kind of checkpoint naming schemes.

### Checkpoint Specs
Delta supports following two checkpoint specs:

#### V2 Spec
This checkpoint spec allows putting [add and remove file](#Add-File-and-Remove-File) in the
[sidecar files](#sidecar-files). This spec can be used only when [v2 checkpoint table feature](#v2-checkpoint-table-feature) is enabled.
Checkpoints following V2 spec have the following structure:
- Each v2 spec checkpoint includes exactly one [Checkpoint Metadata](#checkpoint-metadata) action.

> - Remaining rows in the V2 spec checkpoint refers the other actions mentioned [here](#checkpoints-1)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Remaining rows in the V2 spec checkpoint refer to the other actions mentioned [here](#checkpoints-1)
```

Reviewer 2: Also, "here" isn't a super helpful link title... but I don't know a better name given that we have two sections about checkpointing right now?

- All the non-file actions i.e. all actions except [add and remove file](#Add-File-and-Remove-File)
must be part of the v2 spec checkpoint itself.
- A writer could choose to include the [add and remove file](#Add-File-and-Remove-File) action in the
V2 spec Checkpoint or they could write the [add and remove file](#Add-File-and-Remove-File) actions in
separate [sidecar files](#sidecar-files). These sidecar files will then be referenced in the V2 spec checkpoint.

> The sidecar files reside in the `_delta_log/_sidecars` directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All sidecar files reside in the `_delta_log/_sidecars` directory.
```

- A V2 spec Checkpoint could reference zero or more [sidecar file actions](#sidecar-file-information).

Note: A V2 spec Checkpoint can either have all the [add and remove file](#Add-File-and-Remove-File) actions
embedded inside itself or all of them should be in [sidecar files](#sidecar-files). Having partial
add and remove file actions in V2 Checkpoint and partial entries in sidecar files is not allowed.

After producing a V2 spec checkpoint, a writer can choose to embed some or all of the V2 spec checkpoint in
the `_last_checkpoint` file, so that readers don't have to read the V2 Checkpoint.

E.g. showing the content of V2 spec checkpoint:
```
{"checkpointMetadata":{"flavor":"flat","tags":{}}}
{"metaData":{...}}
{"protocol":{...}}
{"txn":{"appId":"3ba13872-2d47-4e17-86a0-21afd2a22395","version":364475}}
{"txn":{"appId":"3ae45b72-24e1-865a-a211-34987ae02f2a","version":4389}}
{"sidecarFile":{"path":"3a0d65cd-4056-49b8-937b-95f9e3ee90e5.parquet","sizeInBytes":2341330,"modificationTime":1512909768000,"type":"fileaction","tags":{}}

> {"sidecarFile":{"path":"016ae953-37a9-438e-8683-9a9a4a79a395.parquet","sizeInBytes":8468120,"modificationTime":1512909848000,"type":"fileaction","tags":{}}

Reviewer 2: we have `add` and `remove` -- should this column be just `sidecar` to match?

```

Another example of a v2 spec checkpoint without sidecars:
```
{"checkpointMetadata":{"flavor":"flat","tags":{}}}
{"metaData":{...}}
{"protocol":{...}}
{"txn":{"appId":"3ba13872-2d47-4e17-86a0-21afd2a22395","version":364475}}
{"add":{"path":"date=2017-12-10/part-000...c000.gz.parquet",...}
{"add":{"path":"date=2017-12-09/part-000...c000.gz.parquet",...}
{"remove":{"path":"date=2017-12-08/part-000...c000.gz.parquet",...}
```

#### V1 Spec

> V1 Spec do not support [sidecar files](#sidecar-files) and [checkpoint metadata](#checkpoint-metadata).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The V1 Spec does not support [sidecar files](#sidecar-files) and [checkpoint metadata](#checkpoint-metadata).
```

These are flat checkpoints which contains all actions mentioned [here](#checkpoints-1).

### Checkpoint Naming Scheme

> Delta supports following three checkpoint naming scheme:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Delta supports three checkpoint naming schemes: UUID-named, classic, and multi-part.
```

#### UUID-named checkpoint
This naming scheme represents a [V2 spec checkpoint](#v2-spec) with following file name: `n.checkpoint.u.{json/parquet}`,
where `u` is a UUID and `n` is the snapshot version that this checkpoint represents.

> The UUID-named checkpoints may be in JSON or parquet format. Since these are following [V2 spec](#v2-spec), so they must

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The UUID-named checkpoints may be in JSON or parquet format. Since these are following [V2 spec](#v2-spec), they must
```
or
```suggestion
The UUID-named checkpoints may be in JSON or parquet format. These are following [V2 spec](#v2-spec), so they must
```

Author: Adopting 1st suggestion.

have a [checkpoint metadata](#checkpoint-metadata) action and may reference zero or more checkpoint [sidecar files](#sidecar-files).

Example-1: Json UUID-named checkpoint with sidecars

```
00000000000000000010.checkpoint.80a083e8-7026-4e79-81be-64bd76c43a11.json
_sidecars/3a0d65cd-4056-49b8-937b-95f9e3ee90e5.parquet
_sidecars/016ae953-37a9-438e-8683-9a9a4a79a395.parquet

> _sidecars/7d17ac10-5cc3-401b-bd1a-9c82dd2ea032.parquet

Reviewer 2: The sidecars need to appear in lexical order.

Somewhere in this section, should we make clear that the `_sidecars` dir can contain any number of other files as well?
```
00000000000000000010.checkpoint.80a083e8-7026-4e79-81be-64bd76c43a11.json
_sidecars/016ae953-37a9-438e-8683-9a9a4a79a395.parquet
  ...
_sidecars/3a0d65cd-4056-49b8-937b-95f9e3ee90e5.parquet
  ...
_sidecars/7d17ac10-5cc3-401b-bd1a-9c82dd2ea032.parquet
  ...
```
Or is that implied/obvious?

Author: The sidecar directory is a common dir to store sidecar files for all the checkpoints. It seems implied?

```
00000000000000000020.checkpoint.80a083e8-7026-4e79-81be-64bd76c43a11.parquet
_sidecars/3a0d65cd-4056-49b8-937b-95f9e3ee90e5.parquet
_sidecars/016ae953-37a9-438e-8683-9a9a4a79a395.parquet
```

Example-3: Json UUID-named checkpoint without sidecars

```
00000000000000000112.checkpoint.80a083e8-7026-4e79-81be-64bd76c43a11.json
```

#### Classic checkpoint

A classic checkpoint for version `n` uses the file name `n.checkpoint.parquet`. For example:

```
00000000000000000010.checkpoint.parquet
```

If two checkpoint writers race to create the same classic checkpoint, the latest writer wins.
However, this should not matter because both checkpoints should contain the same information and a
reader could safely use either one.

A classic checkpoint could:
1. Either follow [V1 spec](#v1-spec) or
2. Could follow [V2 spec](#v2-spec). This is possible only when
[V2 Checkpoint table feature](#v2-checkpoint-table-feature) is enabled. In this case it must include
[checkpoint metadata](#checkpoint-metadata) and may or may not have [sidecar files](#sidecar-file-information).

#### Multi-part checkpoint
Multi-part checkpoint uses parquet format.

> This checkpoint type is [deprecated](#problems-with-multi-part-checkpoints) and writers should avoid using it.

Reviewer 2: Mention here that writers are forbidden to use it when v2 checkpoints are enabled?

Author: This is mentioned 4-5 lines below. Also mentioned in "V2 Checkpoints table feature" section.

spark-style hash partitioning. If the table supports [Deletion Vectors](#deletion-vectors), the partitioning
key is the logical file identifier `(path, dvId)`; otherwise the key is just `path` (not `(path, NULL)`). This
ensures deterministic content in each part file in case of multiple attempts to write the files -- even when
older and newer Delta clients race.

##### Problems with multi-part checkpoints

Because they cannot be written atomically, multi-part checkpoints have several weaknesses:

1. A writer cannot validate the content of the just-written checkpoint before readers could start using it.

2. Two writers who race to produce the same checkpoint (same version, same number of parts) can overwrite each other, producing an arbitrary mix of checkpoint part files. If an overwrite changes the content of a file in any way, the resulting checkpoint may not produce an accurate snapshot.

3. Not amenable to performance and scalability optimizations. For example, there is no way to store skipping stats for checkpoint parts, nor to reuse checkpoint part files across multiple checkpoints.

> 4. Multi-part checkpoints also bloat the _delta_log dir and slow down LIST.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Multi-part checkpoints also bloat the _delta_log dir and slow down LIST operations.
```

> [UUID-named](#uuid-named-checkpoint) checkpoint (which follow [V2 spec](#v2-spec)) solves all

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[UUID-named](#uuid-named-checkpoint) checkpoints (which follow [V2 spec](#v2-spec)) solve all
```
or
```suggestion
The [UUID-named](#uuid-named-checkpoint) checkpoint (which follows [V2 spec](#v2-spec)) solves all
```

Author: Adopting 2nd suggestion.

of these problems and should be preferred over multi-part checkpoints. For this reason, Multi-part
checkpoints are forbidden when [V2 Checkpoints table feature](#v2-checkpoint-table-feature) is enabled.

### Handling Backward compatibility while moving to UUID-named v2 Checkpoints

A UUID-named v2 Checkpoint should only be created by clients if the [v2 checkpoint table feature](#v2-checkpoint-table-feature) is enabled.

> When UUID-named v2 checkpoints are enabled, Writers should occasionally create a v2 [Classic Checkpoint](#classic-checkpoint)
> for maintaining compatibility with older clients. These classic checkpoints have the same content as the UUID-named v2 checkpoint
> file name, but older clients (those which do not support [v2 checkpoint table feature](#v2-checkpoint-table-feature)) will recognize the classic
> file name, allowing them to extract [Protocol](#protocol-evolution) and fail gracefully with an invalid protocol

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When UUID-named v2 checkpoints are enabled, Writers should occasionally create a v2 [Classic Checkpoint](#classic-checkpoint)
to maintain compatibility with older clients which do not support [v2 checkpoint table feature](#v2-checkpoint-table-feature) and so do not recognize UUID-named checkpoints. These classic checkpoints have the same content as the UUID-named v2 checkpoint, but older clients will recognize the classic
file name, allowing them to extract [Protocol](#protocol-evolution) and fail gracefully with an invalid protocol
```

version error on v2-checkpoint enabled tables. Writers should create classic checkpoints often enough to allow older
clients to discover them and fail gracefully.

### Allowed combinations for `checkpoint spec` <-> `checkpoint file naming`

Checkpoint Spec | [UUID-named](#uuid-named-checkpoint) | [classic](#classic-checkpoint) | [multi-part](#multi-part-checkpoint)
-|-|-|-
[V1](#v1-spec) | Invalid | Valid | Valid
[V2](#v2-spec) | Valid | Valid | Invalid

### Metadata Cleanup

> The _deltaLog directory could increase in size as more and more commits and checkpoints are accumulated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The _deltaLog directory grows over time as more and more commits and checkpoints are accumulated.
```

Author: The classic checkpoint created should be complete in itself. It is a kind of v2 checkpoint which is just following classic naming convention. It is valid checkpoint which even any new Delta reader could read and initialize a snapshot and return correct results.

> Implementations are recommended to do regular cleanup of old deltaLog to cleanup unneeded files and reduce the directory size.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Implementations are recommended to delete expired commits and checkpoints in order to reduce the directory size.
```

The following steps could be used to do cleanup of the DeltaLog directory:

> 1. Identify a threshold (in days) uptil which we want to preserve the deltaLog. Let's refer to

Author: The protocol today doesn't specify anything around how long should the deltalog be retained for OR what table property should control this. I guess this is left to individual implementation to decide.

This section outlines basic steps an implementation could follow in order to cleanup deltaLog past 'x' days.

midnight UTC of that day as `cutOffTimestamp`. The newest commit not newer than the `cutOffTimestamp` is
the `cutoffCommit`, because a commit exactly at midnight is an acceptable cutoff. We want to retain everything including and after the `cutoffCommit`.
2. Identify the most recent checkpoint before the `cutOffCommit`. Lets call it `cutOffCheckpoint`.
We need to preserve the `cutOffCheckpoint` to enable time travel for commits between `cutOffCheckpoint`

> and the next available checkpoint.

Reviewer 2: Two things we could convey more clearly:
1. We want to identify the newest checkpoint that is not newer than the cutoff commit. A checkpoint at the cutoff commit is ideal, but an older one will do.
2. We need to preserve that checkpoint, and all commits after it, because we need them to create a snapshot as-of the cutoff commit.

> 3. Delete all the [delta log entries](#delta-log-entries) before the `cutOffCheckpoint` checkpoint.
> 4. Delete all the [checkpoint files](#checkpoints) before the `cutOffCheckpoint` checkpoint.

Reviewer 2: Should we combine this into one sentence?
```suggestion
3. Delete all [delta log entries](#delta-log-entries) and [checkpoint files](#checkpoints) before the `cutOffCheckpoint` checkpoint.
```

5. Now read all the available [checkpoints](#checkpoints-1) in the _delta_log directory and identify

> the corresponding [sidecar files](#sidecar-files). These sidecar files needs to be protected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the corresponding [sidecar files](#sidecar-files). These sidecar files need to be protected.
```

> 6. List all the files in `_delta_log/_sidecars` directory, preserve files that are less than a day

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. List all the files in `_delta_log/_sidecars` directory, preserving files that are less than a day
```

Reviewer 2: We protect sidecars that are less than a day old, to not break in-progress checkpoints?
If so, we should probably say that.

Author: The implementation is not done yet but will be done in upcoming weeks.
